# ♕ Phase 4: Chess Database

- [Chess Application Overview](../chess.md)
- 🖥️ [Videos](#videos)
- [TA Tips](../../instruction/chess-tips/chess-tips.md#phase-4---database): A collection of common problems for this phase

#### 🥅 Outcomes of this Deliverable

1. **Frame** software engineering problems by clarifying system purpose, constraints, and responsibilities, demonstrating both sound technical judgment and a sense of ownership for the long-term impact of software others depend on.
1. **Explore** object-oriented frameworks, network protocols, distributed services, and databases with curiosity and discipline, developing accurate mental models while valuing learning as essential to responsible engineering practice.
1. **Design** software systems using object-oriented principles and clear interfaces that support reliability and maintainability, motivated by care for future users, collaborators, and the evolution of the system over time.
1. **Build** distributed applications that faithfully translate design intent into readable, testable implementations, showing diligence and integrity in the quality of code produced.
1. **Test** software systems systematically to validate behavior and uncover failure modes, valuing evidence, honesty, and accountability as foundations of trustworthy software.

---

In this part of the Chess project, you will create a MySQL-backed implementation of your Data Access interfaces and integrate it into your services. This enables the ability to store data persistently in a MySQL database instead of volatile main memory. You will also write unit tests using JUnit for your DAO classes. This involves the following steps:

1. Install the MySQL database management system (DBMS) on your development machine. Instructions to [install MySQL](../../instruction/mysql/mysql.md).
1. Modify `db.properties` to contain your database username and password.
1. Design your database tables (i.e., your database `schema`).
1. Implement a MySQL-backed version of your Data Access interfaces. Initially, you can just stub out the methods.
1. Add functionality to create your database and tables automatically if they do not exist when your server starts up.
1. Iteratively write a test for each of your Data Access interface methods along with the backing MySQL code.
1. Ensure that all provided pass-off tests work properly, including the `DatabaseTests` added for this assignment and the `StandardAPITests` from the previous phase.

## Getting Started

Complete the [Getting Started](getting-started.md) instructions before working on this phase.

## Making Database Connections

The starter code found in the `server/src/main/dataaccess/DatabaseManager.java` file reads the database configuration from `db.properties` and contains a static function for creating database connections. The following code demonstrates how to use this utility.

```java
public void example() throws Exception {
   try (var conn = DatabaseManager.getConnection()) {
      try (var preparedStatement = conn.prepareStatement("SELECT 1+1")) {
         var rs = preparedStatement.executeQuery();
         rs.next();
         System.out.println(rs.getInt(1));
      }
   }
}
```

Make sure that you wrap your calls to get a connection with a `try-with-resources` block so that the connection is automatically closed.

## Initializing Your Database and Tables

As you design your database schema, carefully consider data types, primary and foreign keys, autogenerated IDs, default values, and whether a field can be `null`.

> [!WARNING]
>
> On some operating systems, MySQL treats database and table names as case-sensitive, while on others it does not. To ensure cross-platform compatibility, always ensure your database, table, and field names in your Java code match the case used in your SQL query statements.

The `DatabaseManager` class has a method for creating a database if it does not exist. While you are not strictly required to use that specific code, your server **must** automatically create both the database and the necessary tables on startup based on the values in `db.properties`. This allows the pass-off tests to run without manual database setup.

The [Pet Shop](../../petshop/server/src/main/dataaccess/MySqlDataAccess.java) example provides a reference for how to initialize your database on startup.

Note that once your code creates the tables for the first time, changing your `CREATE TABLE` statements in code will **not** modify existing table definitions in the database. See the [Altering Tables](../../instruction/db-sql/db-sql.md#altering-tables) instruction for more information on how to handle schema changes.

## Password Hashing

To protect the security of your users' passwords, you must hash them using the BCrypt algorithm. When a user registers or changes their password, hash it before storing it in the database.

```java
void storeUserPassword(String username, String clearTextPassword) {
   String hashedPassword = BCrypt.hashpw(clearTextPassword, BCrypt.gensalt());

   // Write the hashed password to the database along with the user's other information
   writeHashedPasswordToDatabase(username, hashedPassword);
}
```

When a user attempts to log in, retrieve the stored hash and use BCrypt to verify the provided password.

```java
boolean verifyUser(String username, String providedClearTextPassword) {
   // Read the previously hashed password from the database
   var hashedPassword = readHashedPasswordFromDatabase(username);

   return BCrypt.checkpw(providedClearTextPassword, hashedPassword);
}
```

The code above demonstrates the concepts needed for secure password storage. You should adapt this to your specific DAO implementation. You do not need a separate table for passwords; the hashed password can be stored in your existing `user` table.

## ChessGame Serialization/Deserialization

The most straightforward way to store the state of a `ChessGame` in MySQL is to serialize it to a JSON string and store that string in a `TEXT` or `VARCHAR` column. Whenever your server needs to update a game's state, it should:

1. Select the game’s JSON string from the database.
2. Deserialize the JSON string into a `ChessGame` Java object.
3. Update the state of the `ChessGame` object.
4. Re-serialize the updated `ChessGame` object to a JSON string.
5. Update the game's JSON string in the database.

Carefully consider the need for a Gson type adapter during serialization. If your classes contain interface fields (like `ChessBoard` or `ChessPiece`), you must tell Gson how to instantiate the concrete classes during deserialization. Review the [instruction](../../instruction/json/json.md) on this topic for details.

## Relevant Instruction Topics

- [JSON and Serialization](../../instruction/json/json.md): Serializing objects for database storage.
- [Relational Databases](../../instruction/db-model/db-model.md): How relational databases work.
- [MySQL](../../instruction/mysql/mysql.md): Getting MySQL installed.
- [SQL](../../instruction/db-sql/db-sql.md): Using SQL statements.
- [JDBC](../../instruction/db-jdbc/db-jdbc.md): Using SQL from Java, including type adapters.
- [Liskov Substitution Principle](../../instruction/design-principles/design-principles.md#liskov-substitution-principle): Fully implementing DAO interfaces.
- [Pet Shop](../../petshop/petshop.md): Example of multiple DataAccess implementations.

## ☑ Deliverable

### Pass-Off Tests

The tests provided for this assignment are in the `DatabaseTests` class. These tests make HTTP requests to test your server's end-to-end functionality.

Additionally, run the `StandardAPITests` from the previous phase to ensure that your move to a persistent database hasn't broken existing functionality.

### Database Unit Tests

The pass-off tests do not examine the internal state of your game board directly. Therefore, it is critical that you write unit tests that fully verify everything you are persisting to the database. This includes tests for storing an initial board, adding players, making moves, and updating game states.

Your unit test deliverable must meet the following requirements:

1. Write one positive and one negative JUnit test case for every public method in your DAO classes (except for `clear` methods, which only require a positive test case).
   - A **positive test case** verifies that an action happens successfully (e.g., successfully creating a new user).
   - A **negative test case** verifies that the operation fails gracefully under incorrect conditions (e.g., attempting to create a user with a username that already exists).
1. Ensure all unit tests pass, including the new DAO tests and the Service tests from the previous assignment.

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> You must place your data access test cases in the folder `server/src/test/java/dataaccess`. Your test class names must end with the suffix `Test` or `Tests` (e.g., `SQLUserDAOTests.java`). Otherwise, the autograder will not find them.

### Code Quality

For this phase, the autograder will evaluate the quality of your source code. The rubric used for this evaluation can be found here: [Rubric](../code-quality-rubric.md)

### Pass-Off, Submission, and Grading

All tests in your project must pass to complete this phase.

To pass off this assignment, use the course [auto-grading](https://cs240.click/) tool. If your code passes, your grade will automatically be entered in Canvas.

```masteryls
{"id":"bcc505a6-10fd-4994-bac8-28e2b37148b3","title":"Submission Precheck","type":"multiple-choice"}
- [x] All of the test cases, including the DAO unit tests I wrote, are passing, I have verified my code quality, and my GitHub commit history complies with the course requirements.
- [ ] I need to back and do some more work before submitting.
```

### Grading Rubric

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> You are required to commit to GitHub at every minor milestone (e.g., after passing a specific test). This should result in a commit history that clearly details your progress. If your Git history does not demonstrate consistent effort, your submission may be rejected.

| Category       | Criteria                                                                                                                                                                            |       Points |
| :------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -----------: |
| GitHub History | At least 8 GitHub commits evenly spread over the assignment period that demonstrate proof of work                                                                                   | Prerequisite |
| Functionality  | All pass-off test cases succeed                                                                                                                                                     |          100 |
| Code Quality   | [Rubric](../code-quality-rubric.md)                                                                                                                                                 |           30 |
| Unit Tests     | All test cases pass<br/>Each public method on DAO classes has two test cases (one positive, one negative)<br/>Every test case includes an Assert statement                           |           25 |
|                | **Total**                                                                                                                                                                           |      **155** |

## Videos

- 🎥 [Phase 4 Introduction (4:21)](https://byu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=1d2253eb-f42c-4091-8d6f-b19301573278) - [[transcript]](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17707032/CS_240_Chess_Phase_4_Transcript.pdf)
- 🎥 [Making Database Connections (6:22)](https://byu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=9eb42a5d-6770-4d1a-a3ab-b1930158f0d3) - [[transcript]](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17707047/CS_240_Making_Database_Connections_Transcript.pdf)
- 🎥 [Initializing Your Database and Tables (4:22)](https://byu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=953900dc-0b8e-4ed8-a732-b193015b7e64) - [[transcript]](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17707074/CS_240_Initializing_Your_Database_and_Tables_Transcript.pdf)
- 🎥 [Password Hashing (4:14)](https://byu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=671b0db7-323b-4bec-b0b7-b193015cf733) - [[transcript]](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17707082/CS_240_Password_Hashing_Transcript.pdf)
- 🎥 [ChessGame Serialization/Deserialization (6:17)](https://byu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=5b9f4b5e-a3ae-442f-a311-b193015f1b34) - [[transcript]](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17707104/CS_240_ChessGame_Serialization_Deserialization_Transcript.pdf)
- 🎥 [Database Unit Tests (1:52)](https://byu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=ab5a02c1-bf04-4514-afc0-b19301611d40) - [[transcript]](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17707118/CS_240_Database_Unit_Tests_Transcript.pdf)
- 🎥 [Grading Rubric (2:02)](https://byu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=1b8d4c3b-1e76-4474-9007-b19301620058) - [[transcript]](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17707133/CS_240_Grading_Rubric_Transcript.pdf)